usls.el -- Unassuming Sidenotes of Little Significance
------------------------------------------------------

WARNING: This software is pre-alpha quality.  There will be bugs,
errors, cases where improvements could be made.  Please do not try it
with sensitive data that you have not safely backed up.  If you do use
it, I encourage you to send me feedback about anything you feel could be
improved or otherwise made different.


USLS or usls, which may be pronounced as a series of letters or just
"useless", is a set of utilities for fleshing out a note-taking workflow
that revolves around a strict file naming convention and relies
exclusively on core Emacs tools.

usls.el is meant to be a simple tool for streamlining the process of
creating notes.  It does not provide utilities that already exist in the
Emacs milieu or standard Unix tools, such as dired and grep
respectively.  The focus is on the main points of interaction: (i)
creating notes, (ii) adding forward/backward references to other notes,
(iii) browsing such references for the current file, (iv) visiting the
'usls-directory', (v) finding a file that belongs to said directory.


The file name convention
------------------------

All files created with usls have a file name that follows this pattern:

    DATE--CATEGORY--TITLE.EXTENSION

All fields are separated by two hyphens.

The DATE field represents the date in year-month-day followed by an
underscore and the current time in hour-minute-second notation.  The
presentation is compact, with only the underscore separating the two
components.  Like this: 20201108_091625.  The DATE serves as the unique
identifier of each note.

CATEGORY is one or more entries separated by a hyphen.  Items that need
to be more than one word long must be written with an underscore.  So
"emacs_library" is one category, while "emacs-library" are two.

The TITLE is the title of the note that gets extracted and hyphenated.
An entry about "This is a test" produces a "this-is-a-test" TITLE.

Some complete examples:

20201007_124941--economics--plentiful-and-predictable-liquidity.txt
20201007_104945--emacs-git--git-patch-formatting.txt
20201105_113805--monetary_policy--asset-bubbles-macroprudential-policy.txt

EXTENSION is one of ".txt", ".md", ".org" and is subject to a
user-facing customisation option.


Main points of entry
--------------------

The aforementioned are handled automatically by the 'usls-new-note'
command.  Invoking it brings up a minibuffer prompt for entering the
note's title.  Once that is done, it opens a second prompt, with
completion, for inputting the category.  The date is always derived
automatically.

Completion for categories presents a list that combines two sources: (1)
a customisable list of "known categories", (2) a dynamic list of
inferred categories from existing file names.  The latter is possible
due to the assumption that the file name convention is fully respected.

To create a new category, just enter text that does not match any of the
existing items.  To input multiple categories, separate them with a
comma or a space.  If your completion framework does not support such
actions, then it should be considered undesirable behaviour and reported
upstream.

'usls-new-note' accepts an optional prefix argument, with C-u.  Doing so
will start the command with a completion prompt for the subdirectory to
be used for the new note.  Subdirectories must already exist in the
filesystem, else an error message is displayed.

A key feature of 'usls-new-note' is the ability to extract the current
region, if active, and place it below the area where the point will be
in.  This is useful for quickly capturing some text you wish to comment
on and keep it in context.

The note's text and the captured region are demarcated by a horizontal
rule, denoted by three space-separated asterisks for plain text and
markdown (* * *), or five consecutive hyphens for org (-----), plus
empty lines before and after the separator.


References to other notes
-------------------------

In the interest of simplicity, usls.el does not maintain a database and
does not try to be too smart about linking between notes in the
'usls-directory'.  A "link" is, for our purposes, a plain text reference
to the unique identifier of a file (the DATE mentioned above).

Inserting such text is made simple with the use of 'usls-id-insert'.  It
will produce a minibuffer completion prompt with a list of all notes
except the current one.  Selecting an item will place its ID at point,
preceded by an uptick.  Like this:

    A reference here.^20201108_141930

An endnote is also included, now with two successive upticks (^^) which
points to the full file name of the referenced entry.  If support for
subdirectories is enabled (via 'usls-subdir-support'), such endnotes
will include a complete filesystem path.  Otherwise they are assumed as
relative to the 'usls-directory'.

In the background, the referenced file will get a backward reference as
an endnote, now denoted by two adjacent at-signs (@@) followed by the
file name of the item where the reference was created.

USLS makes sure to remove duplicate backward references whenever a new
one is created, but it does not try to update them in case things
change.  This is where general-purpose tools come in handy, such as the
ability to edit a grep buffer with the wgrep package.  Combine that with
your completion framework's directory-wide search or something like the
rg.el library to edit references in bulk (e.g. when renaming a file
name).

To visit the reference at point, one can rely on Emacs' ability to
identify a file name contextually (among others).  Type C-x C-f or M-x
find-file and follow it up with M-n.  You will get the file-at-point
(i.e. the referenced entry) as the selected item.  Or call the command
'usls-follow-link' which uses minibuffer completion, with candidates
being the file references documented in the endnotes.


Accessing notes
---------------

Two commands allow you to quickly visit your notes with usls.el:

1. 'usls-dired' will produce a dired buffer with the contents of the
   'usls-directory'.

2. 'usls-find-file' uses minibuffer completion to run 'find-file' on the
   selected entry, with options in the list being all the files in the
   'usls-directory'.


Standard Emacs commands for extending usls.el
---------------------------------------------

As we do not have any intent to reproduce general purpose tools for
usls-specific cases, we encourage the usage of existing solutions within
the Emacs milieu.  Some ideas:

+ Use a completion framework, such as Icomplete (built-in), Ivy, Helm,
  Selectrum.  Packages such as the Orderless completion style can
  further improve your experience, depending on your choice and needs.

+ Learn how to run directory-wide searches and how to refactor entries
  in bulk.  A common workflow involves some grep command and the wgrep
  package.  Though you could also use 'ibuffer-do-query-replace',
  'dired-do-find-regexp-and-replace', 'multi-occur'.

+ Benefit from dired's numerous capabilities.

  * For example, the key sequence '% m' (dired-mark-files-regexp) lets
    you mark files based on a regular expression or just a string.  Say
    you wish to only see notes about "emacs".  Do '% m emacs', then
    toggle the mark with 't' and complete the process with 'k'.  What
    you just did is to remove from view all entries that do no match the
    pattern you searched for.  Bring everything back to the standard
    view with 'g'.

  * Another neat feature of dired is 'dired-goto-file' which is bound to
    'j' by default.  It lets you jump to the line of a given file using
    minibuffer completion.  So if your completion framework supports
    fuzzy search or out-of-order matching of regular expression groups,
    you can interactively find virtually any file with only a few key
    strokes.

The principle is to learn how to use Emacs' existing capabilities or
extensions to your advantage---not just for usls but for your day-to-day
operations.


General principles of usls.el
-----------------------------

This blog post from 2020-10-08 describes the core ideas of usls:
<https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2020-10-08-intro-usls-emacs-notes/>.
Some references are out-of-date, since the library is expanded to
support Org and Markdown file types, while it can be configured to
access subdirectories inside the 'usls-directory'.
